---
layout: post
title:  "The Niger/France crisis"
date:   2025-02-27
description: "Niger crisis management is one of the biggest failure of French diplomacy over the last decades"
---

<p class="intro"><span class="dropcap">T</span>he United Nations projects that by 2050, Africa's population will reach close to 2.5 billion. Such a figure would mean that more than 25 percent of the world's population will be African. <a href="https://www.imf.org/-/media/Files/Publications/Fandd/Article/2023/September/Picture-this-0923.ashx">Source</a></p>

The images of Nigerien population storming the French embassy in Niamey and raising Nigerien and Russian flags will last for long. To my humble knowledge, it is one of the biggest failures of French diplomacy over the last decades. Hôtel Ivoire retaliation/massacre is another one, but might be attribuable more to the French army than to the French  Diplomacy.

Let's recap the situation in Niamey to understand what are the French diplomacy mistakes:
- There is a coup d'état in Niamey as president elected Mohamed Bazoum is being held in his residence by General Tiany who is the capitain of the National Guard which controls the presidential palace. From what we've heard, Bazoum was at the point of sacking General Tiany and replace him with someone else and Tiany didn't like that. Behind the scenes, petrol has been discovered in Niger and it's been told that Bazoum wanted to give the exploitation contracts to a French company. Tiany doesn't see things tht way, because uranium has been exploited by French companies for decades and Nigerien people got almost nothing from it. Former president Issoufou seems to also have taken some part in this coup !

- In this chaotic situation, French president Emmanuel Macron tries to onboard the regional group (ECOWAS) on a military intervention on Niger soil to re-establish Bazoum as president. Well, the thing is ECOWAS is an economic organization and not a military one and this so-called military intervention to reinstate democracy is 'nipped in the bud'. This military intervention could't take place because no country in ECOWAS has enough military manpower to overtake Niger alone, except Nigeria... But it's almost impossible to see some Nigerian Haoussa military men fight Haoussa Nigerien military brothers over some French governement directives. North of Nigeria is home to millions of inhabitatants trading daily with their Nigerien counterparts. A military intervention would put the whole region of more than 50 million inhabitants in chaos. And traditional kings of the region settles some meetings and prevented this intervention to happen. Apparently the weight of traditional powers was neglected. First error of the French diplomacy.

- French ambassador in Niger have been known lately to be very communicative over his social medias (namely Twitter) against "so-called panafricanist influencers" and tried his best to show the benefits of French and European collaboration to the people of Niger. One thing he couldn't change is the ranking of Niger in (10) least developed countries in the World. But the Nigerien people know for sure that their uranium empowers a big percentage of France energy mix. And sadly they saw almost no benefit from it. Neither the so-called corrupt political elite. Otherwise, there would have been very wealthy Nigerien elite people, which I'm unaware of. Or those wealthy people would have sponsored a lot of demonstration in Niger against the military regime. Well, at some point, Nigerien people directed their anger towards French ambassador Syvain Itté. And stormed the upskirts of the French embassy, raising placards saying that French military and ambassador should go! Before that, the military regim has declared the French ambassador 'persona non grata' and told him he had 48 hours to leave the country. French president said at that time that he wouldn't leave and that the military regime was not legitimate while his ambassador was, so the regime had to leave instead of the ambassador. Second error of the French diplomacy is to not have perceived that the population was in favour of the military regime. They were probably more busy having some buffets "au caviar et au champagne" !

- Let's focus now on the last error of the French diplomacy. Niger is a country of 1,26 millions km square and one of top ten countries with GDP increase in the world. The Chinese have discovered oil and built a pipeline from Niger to Cotonou. There will be a huge growth in the population of Niger where women have 7/8 kids in average. They will need good education,  healthcare, leisure, energy; tourism will grow, and they need expertise in almost all fields. France and European countries have that expertise. It would have been very wise to keep economic ties with Niger hoping the political tensions will be resolved in the future.

For my part, I am more than eager to collaborate with associations and people of Niger and also associations and people from France to foster economic growth for the benefits of both populations. Feel free to contact me for beneficial opportunities.

Vive le Niger !
Vive la France !
