---
layout: post
title:  "Africa countries' commercial balance"
date:   2025-02-27
description: "Why not applying Trump's 101 economy lessons to Africa ?"
---

<p class="intro"><span class="dropcap">W</span>hile POTUS (Sir Trump) is showcasing his economy skills to the entire world, why souldn't African countries and stakeholders learn from his principles</p>

USA President elected aka POTUS or Mr. Donald Trump is actually blowing hot and cold to the entire global economy and financial markets. Yet, European 'friends' and others from the Western World are complaining about those tarrifs. But the economy principles behind Trump's policy are not wrong after all. He just applies reciprocity tarrifs to countries having an inequal commercial balance with the United States of America. Is that wrongdoing ? I don't think so ...

In my humble opinion, African countries should get inspired by Trump's method to understand where their commmercial balance is at and plan to diversify their partners to have as much as possible equal commercial balance with the countries they trade in. Is India or Pakistan selling a lot of chemical countries to our country and thus creating a huge defficitary balance with our country ? Yes ? Then, it's not a problem. We must be able to sell the same amount of goods to that same country, and by this process create jobs in our country. If the foreign country does not accept, then maybe it is time to find another supplier. I'm sure plenty other countries could replace and will be more than happy to trade with us, and maybe at lower prices.

Here are the top African countries and their highest commercial balance deficitaries:

Nigeria
SA
Egypt
Morocco
Algeria
....