---
layout: post
title:  "Francophone Africa"
date:   2025-02-27
description: "French speaking African countries"
---

<p class="intro"><span class="dropcap"></span>As of 2025, the country with most French speaker is no longer France, but Democratic Republic of Congo, DRC.</p>

After the [scramble for Africa](), major European countries (UK, France, Spain, Portual, Belgium, Germany, Portugal) had colonies in Africa. Each country had their own policy with regards to the local populations. As the colonization was mainly for economic purposes, most of those countries installed some kind of harbour.

France was actually one of the major players in Africa and had approximately a third of Africa in superficy as colonies.
[Francophone Africa]

In 

In the perspective of those African countries, it is clear that their trade relationships suffered a lot from the monomole of France in business.
It is definitely easier to trade with many partners, stakeholders and countries, and businesses around the world if you speak or understand English. Maybe it will be Mandarin in a few years,
But definitely, French speaking African countries need to multiply their partnerships with as many countries in the world as possible.

It is very warring also that country like Canada which has a very strong economy, especially the Quebec one does not have major trading with those countries.
The same goes for countries like Luxemburg and Switzerland.

As for in Africa, some countries like Ghana forexemple have all their borders with French speaking countrieS. It is therefore important for a country like Ghana to undderstand the language of its neighbords to foster trade.

Same goes for Louisinia
Also Vietnam

Among the years, I've seen may USAID and GIZ volunteers coming to Africa to enhance their French as well.

Here is a map of all Francophone countries in Africa:

Bénin
Burkina Faso
Burundi
Cameroun
Comores
Côte d'Ivoire
Djibouti
Gabon
Guinée
Guinée équatoriale
Madagascar
Mali
Niger
République centrafricaine
République démocratique du Congo
République du Congo
Rwanda
Sénégal
Seychelles
Tchad
Togo

Country
Population
Capital
President
Points of Interest
One song of the country
Funny french words
